DV124_8_SAS On Mobile Device Configuration
Self-Assessment Sheet

1) What is Microsoft cloud-based services called?
Microsoft 365, Microsoft Outlook


2) What is apples cloud service called?
iCloud

3) What is an advantage to using iCloud?
Extensive synchronization options between multiple apple devices (laptop, desktop, mobile device, ipad, etc.)

4) On iCloud are you able to select what you want synchronized?
Yes

5) Is iCloud used for backups?
Yes

6) Can you use iCloud with Microsoft?
No, it is limited to Apple devices.

It is possible but there are greater limitations than if you were to use an Apple device. Examples : iCloud email to Outlook, iCloud.com on Windows device

7) There are limited synchronization options for iCloud. True or False?
False

8) If you lose your iPhone, how can you access your data and is it backed up?
Log into a new phone with your credentials. All this data will be downloaded and synchronized with your new device.

9) With Microsoft 365, you can only synchronize the email between your mobile device and other email systems you use. True or False?
False - contacts, calendars, reminders, notes

10) What is outlook a part of?
Microsoft 365 suite

11) Can you sync your calendars across all devices using Microsoft 365?
Yes

12) If you’re running your own exchange servers, what service are you using?
Microsoft Outlook or Microsoft Exchange

13) Is there a way if you create a note on your mobile phone, the note automatically appears on Microsoft 365 on your desktop and vice versa?
Yes you can synchronize emails, calendars, reminders, notes with all devices linked with Microsoft 365.

14) To connect to iCloud, you would use your iCloud.
iCloud username and password.

15) Where can you access your iCloud settings?
On various Apple devices like iPhone (settings app), iPad (settings app), Mac (Apple menu→System preferences).

16) There are extensive configuration settings for iCloud, but you can’t control exactly what data is synchronized. True or False?
False

17) You can use iCloud to sync your emails across all your IOS devices. True or False?
True

18) Can configure the system to allow cellular transfers or only allow transfers over faster 802.11 networks?
Yes

19) You can enable and disable different network connections or control the use of exactly how you download when you’re on a cellular network. True or False?
True

20) Using cellular networks, you can’t download files. True and False and explain?
False. You can download files from cellular networks just like a WIFI network. There are limitations such as download speed and data usage limits by service provider if you do not have unlimited data. Large files are also to be considered. Nonetheless, it is possible to download files with cell networks.
