DV124_5_SAS Mobile Device Accessories
Self-Assessment Sheet

1) If you are someone who takes your laptop back and forth between work and home, what’s a good solution for you to minimize all the plugging and unplugging of cables used for devices such as printers, keyboards etc.?
Use a docking station - just plug in a laptop in different docking stations instead of unplugging and replugging multiple devices from the laptop. Those devices can plug into the docking station.

2) What does TRRS stand for?
Tip-ring-ring-sleeve

3) What is one of the challenges our mobile phones and tablets have with speakers that are built in?
Very small speakers with weaker sound than external speakers

4) What are the functions of a stylus?
Activate interface on electronics without touching with your hand. You can take notes, write signatures - same as writing with a pen on paper for example but instead on an electronic device. It is easier to see the screen with a stylus.

5) Can you disable the mouse track pad on your laptop while using an external mouse?
yes

6) If you need to perform very precise functions or be able to do something very specific on the screen, you may want to try using?
an active / digital stylus

7) If you’re an artist or someone who wants to perform more precise work on a tablet, you may want to try using an?
Active stylus (digital stylus)

8) A digital stylus provides you with more functionality and more precise usability than something like a capacitive touch pen. True or False?
true

9) The stylus is not able to communicate independently with the device that’s being used if those two devices are not touching each other. True or False?
FALSE

10) If you’re using an Apple iPad, you would need to use what type of pen?
Apple pencil

11) Using an active stylus you can see as the user is writing on the screen and they apply a little more pressure, then you can see that the difference in the line width changes. True or False?
TRUE

12) What if you’re using a computer that doesn’t have any type of capacitive display or any type of active touchscreen that you can interact with?
Add touchscreen capability with external digitizer.

13) Do laptops include an external mouse?
no

14) Can you add an external keyboard and mouse on a Mac?
yes

15) Can you customize exactly the way the trackpad works on your system?
yes

16) What does TRRS do?
It is a 3.5mm analog audio jack that sends a copper connection to communicate audio. The design of the TRRS separates signals used for input and output (talk in microphone and listen to audio).

17) If you’re an Apple user, you may not have the option of a USB or a 3- and 1/2-millimeter audio connection. True or False?
True

18) What port does apple have?
Lightning port

19) What’s one alternative method an apple user can connect to headphones without the 3.5 mm jack?
Lightning connector
Bluetooth headphones

20) If you like a simpler form of connecting and disconnecting your laptop, you may want to use something like?
Port replicator which is smaller yet similar to a docking station. Typically connected with USB.
