DV124_6_SAS Cellular Standards
Self-Assessment Sheet

1) What were the original cellular networks called?
2G networks

2) What are the two global standards for cellular network?
GSM and CDMA

3) What does GSM stand for?
Global system for mobile communication

4) What does CDMA stand for?
Code division multiple access

5) What does LTE stand for?
Long Term Evolution


6) What is the newest generation of cellular network?
          5G (fifth generation cellular networking)

7) Organizations handle email a little bit differently, and most organizations will have a corporate configuration that needs to be added to the mobile device. True and False?
True

8) CDMA was the most popular in the world and with providers. True or False?
False

9) CDMA was used by what two mobile carriers?
Verizon and Sprint

10) What two standards of cellular network were very good for voice communication?
GSM and CDMA

11) What was a limitation with GSM and CDMA networks?
Limited support for sending data. Originally circuit switch networks - needed upgrades for packet-switching / some type of connectivity.

12) What percentage of the worldwide market did GSM hold?
90%

13) What network allowed you to have all of your phone configurations on a subscriber identity module or a SIM card?
GSM

14) This network allowed us to have much more capabilities for the data that we were sending from our mobile devices. And with additional speed, we could send more of that data much faster over these same networks?
3G third generation network

15) This network controlled exactly what handsets you were able to use on their networks and was not so popular around the world?
CDMA

16) What was introduced as the third new network?
3G technologies (third generation)

17) With the enhanced speeds of the 3G network, we were able to introduce new capabilities for our mobile handsets. What are some examples?
GPS
Mobile television (streaming video/audio)
Video on demand

18) What does LTE stand for and what are the average speed of the network?
Long term evolution (4G technology)

150 megabits/per second
Upgraded LTE version (LTE Advanced {LTE-A}) 300MBits/s

19) The new 5G networks have introduced greatly enhanced speeds. Eventually what speeds will the network be able to perform at?
10 gigabits per second

20) As these 5G networks are rolling out, you may find that you have speeds between ___ and __ megabits per second?
100-900 megabits/s
