11_SAS ON Network Devices
Self-Assessment Sheet

1. What is a Router?
	Device that forwards traffic between different IP subnets (segmented piece of larger network {VLANs}). It uses the IP address that is within the data packet to determine where it hops next before it goes to the final destination. This routing takes place at the layer 3 of the OSI model which is why it may be referred to as a layer 3 device. Routers configured inside a switch may be referred to as layer 3 switches. Routers can connect IP subnets using the same topology, but it is also common to use routers to connect different types of networks together. For example, one router may connect LAN, WAN, copper, and fiber connections on a single device.
In other terms, a router is a networking device that forwards data packets between computer networks. It is the central hub for directing the network traffic and it enables communication between devices on different networks. Some of the key parts of a router are :
Network interconnection : router connecting multiple networks (LAN, WAN, etc.) allowing those devices on different networks to communicate with each other.
Packet forwarding : router examines destination IP address of incoming data packets and determines the optimal path to forward to the destinations, using routing tables and protocols to make its routing decisions.
Traffic control : routers can prioritize and manage traffic based on factors like QoS (quality of service), network congestion, network policies. It can enforce allocation of bandwidth, implement access control policy, and optimize performance of the network.
NAT (Network Address Translation)
Security and Firewall (built-in security, intrusion prevention, VPN, etc.)
Wireless connection (WIFI) - routers acting as access points.
Network Administration - web-based interfaces or command-line interfaces that allow network admins to configure / manage settings like IP addressing, routing protocols, security, diagnostics, etc.
It is a fundamental and vital networking device that connects and directs network traffic between networks, ensuring efficient data transmission and facilitation of communication.
2. What is a Switch?
	It is a networking device that connects devices within a LAN. It facilitates direct communication between devices and helps manage the network traffic efficiently. It operates at the data link layer (layer 2) of the OSI model and uses MAC addresses to forward packets instead of IP addresses like a router. Switches are able to forward traffic at very high speeds because of the hardware that is built into the device. The ASIC (application specific integrated circuit) is what allows for the fast throughput. If a switch is in the core of an enterprise network, it can have tens or hundreds of interfaces. Switches also come in power over ethernet (PoE) format, giving it power over an ethernet connection. If you have a switch that has routing functionality, it is referred to as a layer 3, or multilayer switch.
Switches can carry several features such as network segmentation, VLANs and QoS. Network segmentation allows for creation of multiple network segments within a LAN breaking down a large physical network into smaller logical network segments (virtual LANS {VLANs}). This can improve performance, security, and manageability of a network.
Switches may also use packet switching - when a packet arrives at a switch, it determines the destination MAC address and forwards it only to the port associated with the specific address. This allows for direct communication between devices on the same network segment.
They also may contain MAC address learning and MAC address forwarding - the switch learns the MAC addresses of all devices connected to their ports by looking at the source of the MAC addresses of incoming packets. This information gets stored in a table called the MAC address table or switching table. Once a switch learns the MAC address of connected devices, it can use this to determine the appropriate port where a packet should be forwarded. The packet is only forwarded to the port where the destination device is connected which reduces unnecessary network traffic.
There is also QoS, and broadcast / multicast handling.
Collision avoidance is also present. Hubs operate at the physical layer (layer 1) and pass signals to all devices. Switches use store-and-forward mechanisms to prevent collisions on the network and this ensures packets are transmitted only where the destination port is available which reduces data transmission errors.
3. What is an Unmanaged Switch?
	A switch that does not give you many configuration options. These are not useful in an enterprise network. These are generally found at local or online retailers. It is just connecting devices together and lacks the functionality of an enterprise level / higher level switch.
It has a fixed configuration. You cannot configure any VLANs.
There is little integration with protocols and devices. Such as the SNMP protocol, you cannot find this protocol capability in an unmanaged switch. You cannot query any performance information since it lacks the SNMP functionality (generally) but you can still set up a simple connection with these types of switches. It is good for simple and inexpensive connections to connect devices in a simple network such as a basic home network. It is plug-and-play.
4. What is a Managed Switch?
It is a switch that provides additional capabilities, such as part of the ones listed under Question 2. These are used for more advanced use such as ones in an office or organization. These type of switches need to be monitored constantly to make sure the device and network is working as expected.
Some of the features that you will find on a managed switch :
VLAN support (different IP subnets within a local network).
Traffic prioritization (VOIP traffic priority over file transfer traffic for example).
When multiple switches are connected in a network, you can use spanning tree protocol (STP) to support redundancy of data packets and prevent loops.
Another feature is port mirroring which takes traffic from one port on the switch and copies it to another port on the switch to for example plug in a protocol analyzer to view all the packets traversing on a network (done for troubleshooting or packet analysis).
A managed switch can enable SNMP as mentioned the unmanaged switch wouldn’t carry this feature.
There are other characteristics and functions in a managed switch such as QoS, ACLs, STP, VLANs, enhanced security, remote management, scalability, flexibility. It offers solutions for medium to large sized networks, data centers, enterprise environments, etc. where advanced network management, security, performance, and optimization is important. Administrators have better control, configuration options, and monitoring capabilities.
5. What is a Bridge?
	This is another term for a WAP (wireless access point) since it bridges individuals between a wired and wireless connection using a MAC address similar to how a switch operates. It does not contain any routing features, routers contain a WAP feature built in which is how routers that we use at home have the WIFI connections.
6. What is a Patch Panel?
	It is part of the cable infrastructure in more complex network environments. It is a device used to organize and connect multiple network cables. It would be the central point for managing and terminating network cables and it allows for easy administration and maintenance of network connections. The cables are generally punched down into the patch panel and they are not interfered with. Instead on the front of the patch panel, you have RJ-45 connections that lead into a switch and you can manage that area easily if anything needs to be changed. The cables are organized in a near arrangement. This will allow for easy troubleshooting and maintenance. The patch panels have labels as well that can be used to identify the connected devices or the purpose of the cable. It is helpful for tracing and managing the connections on the network. The patch panel serves as an interconnection point between network devices such as a switch, router, server. It makes everything easy and flexible when maintaining different devices and network segments.
These are commonly used in data centers, server rooms, telecommunications rooms, and structured cabling systems in office buildings. It provides a structured and organized approach to managing the connections in a network and makes the administration, maintenance, and troubleshooting of the network infrastructure a whole lot easier.
Based on the video, there are usually a lot of people in a work environment with multiple devices and setups. These cables need to be managed at some point. These cables all lead to the patch panel that is in a central wiring closet. These devices are connected permanently and punched in (generally) to a patch panel. That cable would not be touched or moved.
Instead the other side like mentioned will have RJ45 connectors that would extend to other interfaces such as a switch. The individuals are now connected to the main infrastructure of a particular network depending on the configurations of the network. If someone needs to move or a new person is hired, you would need to move someone from one connection to another connection on the switch.
If it was one single cable, it would be a hassle to move cables around in the wiring closet to place where it needs to be in this new scenario. That is why you have access from the front end of the patch panel to find the labeling and disconnect and reconnect to another port on a switch. These cables are a lot shorter and there is no need to have a difficult setup when the patch panel makes it a lot easier and quicker to manage these networks.
7. What is a Firewall?
	It is a network security device or a software that will act as a barrier between a trusted internal network and an external network, like the internet. The primary function is to monitor and control incoming and outgoing network traffic based on the security rules. The purpose of this device is to protect the network from unauthorized access, malicious activity, and threats.
It allows or disallows traffic on the network based on IP addresses and port numbers. Since these (TCP, UDP) ports operate on OSI layer 4, this is sometimes referred to as an OSI layer 4 device.
Nowadays it is common to find firewalls that understand application layer traffic and in this case, it would be a layer 7 device.
Some firewalls act as an endpoint for an encrypted tunnel which basically means that you can connect 2 sites across a public network like the internet but all the traffic of those sites is encrypted. Some firewalls also act as a proxy, so if someone is browsing the internet that firewall will halt communication. It will browse for the user, receive the response from that device over the internet and examine to make sure that nothing inside the traffic is malicious. It then sends the results of the query back to the user.
In many cases such as with small SOHO routers that are used at home, the firewall also acts as a router. The device is making forwarding decisions based on the destination IP address. It is acting as an OSI layer 3 device.
In some environments, the firewall is a device that is connected to the internet therefore using it as a router will allow more functions for forwarding traffic.
There are many more functionalities that can be used in a firewall such as traffic filtering, access control, network security zones, application layer filtering, VPN support, and more.
Firewalls are crucial in a network’s security infrastructure providing defense against network attacks, malware, unauthorized access, etc. It helps to protect sensitive data and maintain the integrity of the network and ensure that it is complying with security policies and regulations.
8. What is a Hub?
	Before switches, hubs were used to connect multiple devices on a network. It can be referred to as a multiport repeater. In simple terms, traffic going in one port is repeated to every other port.
It is a basic networking device that operates at the physical layer (layer 1) of the OSI model. A hub lacks intelligence and cannot perform advanced functions like packet filtering or traffic control like a switch can.
They are considered outdated technology and have been replaced by advanced devices like the switch.
A hub has multiple characteristics such as broadcasting (regardless of destination, which creates inefficient use of network bandwidth), collision domain (collision occurs when 2 devices transmit data simultaneously, and the transmission is corrupted {collision detection and retransmission handles these scenarios}), and limited performance as they cannot prioritize or manage network traffic. Network congestion can occur when multiple devices transmit data simultaneously.
It is not efficient to communicate and there is no full duplex communication therefore everything is half duplex.
Since there is a retransmission on every interface, when you add more load and devices on the network, the performance gets slower. A switch is more efficient and a hub is outdated.
9. What is a Cable Modem?
	A modem that uses the same cable for the TV as well as your internet is a cable modem. This allows broadband communication since there are multiple frequencies of traffic over a single wire (TV, phone lines, internet).
DOCSIS (protocol) is the standard of data on the cable network. There can be high speeds available up to 1GB / s. There are usually multiple services available such as data, voice, video with a cable modem.
Cable modems are a networking device that gives internet access by leveraging the cable television infrastructure. A computer or local network is connected to an ISP using a coaxial cable. This is a popular choice for high-speed internet where cable TV networks are readily available. It offers a convenient way to access reliable and fast internet connection to use online services, stream, engage in gaming, access the internet, etc.
10. What is a DSL Modem?
	If your cable company isn’t being used for internet connection, you may be using a telephone company for that connection. It is done through a DSL modem. This technically is an ADSL modem (asymmetric digital subscriber line) and it uses telephone lines used for analog telephones.
DSL is asymmetric because the speeds for download are faster than upload speeds. There are also distance limitations with DSL.
VDSL is also available to provide higher symmetrical speeds for both download and uploads.
A DSL (digital subscriber line) is a networking device that offers high-speed internet over the telephone lines. Similar to cable modems, but the wiring and data transmission differs.
11. What is ONT?
	Optical Network Terminal is a device used for fiber-optic communication networks to turn optical signals into electrical signals that can be understood by equipment such as routers, switches, and modems. It terminates the optical fiber coming from the service provider and converts it into electrical signals over copper or coaxial cables. Different services can be provided such as internet access, VoIP, IPTV (internet protocol TV), and more. It brings in high-speed fiber-optic connection into different environments.
These are typically outside of the house. Again it connects the ISP fiber network into copper or coaxial network. The demarc (demarcation point) could be outside your home or in a data center.
The demarc is important so you know where responsibility lies. The demarc and beyond is the ISP’s responsibility, while everything inside is your responsibility.
12. What is Network Interface Card (NIC)?
	All devices that connect to a wired ethernet connection such as the ones we discussed have a NIC. It is a fundamental device that provides connectivity of networks. Computers, servers, printers, routers, switches, phones, tablets, cameras, etc. all can have one. This is how these devices communicate with the network(s).
NICs can be specific to different network topologies such as ethernet, WAN, wireless, etc. This is what allows the device to properly function and allow for network data transmission between devices.
These could be built into the motherboard of a device, or it can be an expansion card such as if you would need one in a desktop computer.
13. What is a Wireless Access Point (WAP)?
	It is a network device that provides wireless connection for the local network. It is not a wireless router, which is a router and access point in a single device. The functionality of a WAP is specific and limited than a router with built in functions.
It merely provides a link between a wireless and wired network. These are sometimes referred to as a bridge because it is bridging / extending a wired connection into a wireless one.
This device makes forwarding decisions based on the destination MAC address which is similar to how a switch forwards information. It looks if the destination MAC address is on the wireless network if it should send that information to the wired network.
Again it is simply bridging people on the wireless network to people on the wired network. It does not route between subnets and doesn’t perform any network address translation.
These devices would be PoE devices since power to the device is hard to reach otherwise.
14. What is a Wireless LAN Controller?
	It is a network device that is used to manage and control multiple wireless access points (WAPs) in a wireless local area network (WLAN). It is the central management and coordination of the wireless network and it ensures seamless connection, security features, and efficient utilization of resources. There are several features and functions of a WLAN controller such as QoS, AP management, security and authentication (encryption / authentication), guest access and captive portals, and more.
These are common in areas where multiple APs are deployed to provide wireless coverage in a large area like an enterprise, campus, hotel, etc. This is a centralized control device that offers enhanced security, efficient management of wireless networks, and enables organizations to deliver reliable and scalable wireless connections to users in that particular area and setting.
15. What is a Repeater?
	Similar to a hub, a repeater is a network device that operates at the physical layer (layer 1) of the OSI model. Its primary function is to regenerate and amplify signals to extend the reach of a network. This is also considered an outdated device since technology of higher intelligent devices like switches and routers are more efficient at other layers of the OSI model. The main use for the repeater is to extend the reach of a network once the signal is weak over longer distances.


