
14_SAS On Network Services
Self-Assessment Sheet

1. What is a Web Server?
	It is a server, or program / software that serves as webpage content to clients when it is requested for. It is a core part of the world wide web infrastructure and is responsible for hosting websites and making them accessible to users. When the user enters the website's domain name or clicks a link leading to a website, the browser (client) sends a request to the web server associated with this website. The web server processes and retrieves the request for files or data and sends it back to the user’s browser.
Between this process, a DNS server will convert the human written website domain name into IP addresses so the client and server can communicate.
Web servers handle various requests that use protocols like HTTP, HTTPS, FTP, and more. There are specialized languages that build out web pages such as HTML or HTML5. Web servers could serve static web pages as well as dynamic web pages.
2. What is a File Server?
	A centralized storage device with a file structure where you can store information. Since these files are stored on a network and not a local device like we typically do on our computers, you can log in on any device in the network and access your files. SMB is a protocol used on windows to communicate with files. On apple, there is AFP (apple filing protocol). There is also NFS (network file system) and FTP protocols. Users don’t see any of this backend information, they do end user actions like copy, delete, rename, create files. The front end hides the protocol.
A file server (computer, dedicated server) is used to store, manage, and provide access to files and data within a network and acts as a central repository for files allowing multiple client devices to access and share data. The main purpose is to facilitate file storage and retrieval in a network environment. Users can store files centrally making it easy to organize and manage data across multiple devices. These are common in business networks, educational institutes, and other environments where file sharing and collaboration is important.
File servers (just like web servers) can be on physical machines or virtualized servers.
3. What is Print Server?
	A computer or network device that manages and controls printing functions within a network. Its primary job is to centralize printing resources and enable multiple client devices to send print jobs to shared printers. There are several aspects of a print server such as printer sharing, print queue management, printer management, and more. These print servers could be on dedicated hardware or configured using software solutions installed on a computer or server.
In enterprise environments, printers are connected to the network (using a print server) which are stored in centralized areas close to the users. The print server allows all the clients to access this centralized resource of printing. It may have additional functions like routing print queues and printer sharing to ensure sequential process of print orders and outputting to the appropriate printer near the client if there are multiple printers.
If a computer has a print server software while connected to a printer, everyone sends their print jobs to this computer and the print server on this computer would manage this service of printing the jobs sent to it to the connected printer.
Printers may have a built-in software and a network adapter or wireless function to be able to be used as a print server.
There are standardized protocols that allow you to send print jobs to the print server. Usually it is SMB (server message block){windows}. There is also IPP (Internet printing protocol) and LPD (line printer daemon).
4. What is a (Domain Name System) DNS Server?
	Service of a server that is responsible for converting human readable domain names to IP addresses so devices and computers can communicate with each other, and vice versa. The browser (client) will ask the DNS server what the IP address is of www.xyz.com. The browser will use the IP address of the web server to communicate.
DNS is a distributed naming system which means you may have multiple DNS servers in your environment, and outside your environment you may be communicating with many other DNS servers as well.
This conversion process between a domain name and IP address is critical for the entire communications process. It is usually managed by an IT department or an ISP, and they usually have multiple DNS servers to ensure that this service is always available to users.
5. What is a (Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol) DHCP Server?
	Another protocol / service is the DHCP which is responsible for automatically assigning and configuring IP address information on a local device. This is a common service as whenever we connect to a network, we are automatically provided IP addresses, DNS settings, and everything else that is needed to communicate on the network like subnet masks, etc.
A wireless router or cable modem typically would also be running a DHCP server inside. In an enterprise environment, there may be multiple DHCP servers to ensure reliability to connecting devices.
In the settings of a DHCP you may find a lease time, a range of IP addresses to automatically give to clients, and more.
6. What is a Mail Server?
	This server which would require 100% uptime is responsible for sending and receiving mail for your organization. The mail server is critical therefore an IT department would manage it or an ISP or cloud based service would provide this mail service. The mail service is being used at all times and there would usually be a 24/7 support to troubleshoot any issues.
This mail server could be a computer or software and it is responsible for sending, receiving, storing, and delivering email messages within a network or across the internet. It will be the central hub to communicate emails and it facilitates exchange of emails between users or clients.
If you send an email through Gmail for example, your client will connect to the mail server to send the message. The mail server then processes the outgoing message and routes it to the recipient’s mail server through the internet.
The protocol used is SMTP however as discussed in previous modules, POP3 and IMAP4 may be in use depending if you need to exchange between mail servers and receive to a client (SMTP) or send from a client to a mail server (POP3, IMAP4).
7. What is a Proxy Server?
	It is an intermediary server that acts as a bridge between a client and another server or resource on the internet. It serves as a gateway that facilitates communication between clients and target servers and this allows clients to request resources indirectly.
A client requests from a proxy server to access a specific resource instead of going to the target server. The proxy server acts as the middleman and forwards the client request to the target server, which perceives the proxy server as the original request. The proxy server receives its response from that target server / service and then examines this to make sure nothing is malicious. Once everything looks good, it is sent to the user.
This allows for anonymity and privacy for clients by masking the IP address and other info. The proxy server can also implement caching mechanisms to store frequently accessed resources. That way it doesn’t have to contact the target server when a client requests. This improves response times, reduces network bandwidth usage, and eases the load on the target server. There are multiple other functions as well such as security and filtering (inspect & filter incoming & outgoing network traffic), encrypting the traffic, load balancing, access control (user, password), URL filtering and content scanning, and more.
These proxy servers can be configured at the client level where specific devices or apps are configured to use a specific proxy server, or at the network level where the entire network’s traffic is routed to that proxy server. They are common in corporate networks, education institutions, and ISPs. These provide greatly enhanced security, control access, and network performance optimization.
8. What is an Authentication Server?
	Centralized management server for login authentication that centralizes all usernames and passwords. On an enterprise network we would be using many different services that we need to access and this centralized authentication server provides us a way to get access to those services as well as do it in a way that our authentication data (user, password) is protected. This is considered a critical resource and multiple authentication servers are common in organizations.
This server / software is responsible for verifying identities of users / devices in a network, on a computer, or specific resource. It is critical for granting access or denying access based on the outcome of authentication of user credentials. There could be several features and functions of an authentication server such as the user identity verification obviously, a centralized user database maintaining all user account information, 2FA or MFA authentications, SSO (single sign-on), and more.
9. What is SIEM (Security Information and Event Management)?
	With all the servers discussed, there are logs / messages that are important for administrators. Instead of accessing the logs individually for every service being used, this can be consolidated on a central database. Syslog is one of the protocols that allows this and this is a common standard. This is integrated into the SIEM which is a Security Information and Event Manager and that allows it to collect these log files (which would take up a lot of space) and store it on the large SIEM drive array and this allows it to store a large number of files over extended periods of time.
SIEM refers to a comprehensive approach to manage and monitor security events and information within an organization's infrastructure. It combines the SEM and SIM (security event management, security information management) to provide real-time monitoring, threat detection, incident response, and compliance reporting capabilities.
10. What is Forensic Analysis?
	Also known as digital forensics or computer forensics refers to the process of collecting, analyzing, and interpreting digital evidence in a manner that preserves integrity of evidence and is admissible in legal proceedings. It involves investigation of digital devices, networks, and data to uncover and reconstruct events, activities, and potential security incidents.
This process has multiple aspects and steps such as collecting of evidence (off different devices and network logs), data recovery and preservation (extract and recover hidden / deleted data, artifacts, files, and preserve for analysis), reporting and documentation, legal proceedings and expert testimony, and more.
Forensic analysis can be applied in different contexts like criminal investigations, cybersecurity incidents, data breaches, civil litigation, etc. The goal here is to find the truth, provide evidence, and support decision making in legal and investigative situations involving digital evidence.
11. What is Syslog?
With all the servers discussed, there are logs / messages that are important for administrators. Instead of accessing the logs individually for every service being used, this can be consolidated on a central database. Syslog is one of the protocols that allows this and this is a common standard. This is integrated into the SIEM which is a Security Information and Event Manager and that allows it to collect these log files (which would take up a lot of space) and store it on the large SIEM drive array and this allows it to store a large number of files over extended periods of time.
Syslog is a standard protocol and message logging system used for collecting, storing, and forwarding log messages within a network or system. Various devices, apps, and operating systems can send log messages to this central syslog server or repository for analysis, monitoring, and troubleshooting for when the time comes.
12. What is IDS (Intrusion Detection System)?
13. What is IPS(Intrusion Prevention System)?
14. What is All-in-one security appliance?
-
This is an all-in-one security appliance that provides a comprehensive security solution that integrates multiple security functions into a single hardware device or software package. It combines several security features and capabilities to provide a comprehensive protection for networks, systems, and data.
Some of the features are firewall, intrusion detection/prevention (IDP/IPS), antivirus/antimalware, VPN support, DLP (data loss prevention) and more. {multi-layered security}
It also contains a centralized management interface for administrators to manage security functions and settings, VPN connectivity, traffic filtering and content control (URL filter / content inspection), spam filter, CSU/DSU capabilities(ability to connect to WAN), router and/or switch interfaces, bandwidth shaper/QoS to prioritize apps, and more.
These devices allow for a comprehensive and integrated security solution reducing complexity and management overhead associated with deploying and managing multiple standalone security devices.
It simply consolidates security functions on one device. It is considered a next generation firewall. Older versions of this is a UTM (unified threat management) device / Web security gateway.
The IPS/IDS is good for blocking known attacks from traversing a network. The all-in-one security appliance can use a combination of techniques like signature-based detection, behavior analysis, heuristic scanning, and threat intelligence, to detect and prevent a wide range of security threats like malware, viruses, intrusion attempts, and network attacks.
-
15. What is Endpoint Management Server?
It is a centralized server or software designed to manage and control endpoints in an organization’s network. Endpoint refers to devices like laptops, mobiles, computers, IoT devices, servers. This solution streamlines management and administration of endpoints in an organization reducing manual effort and enhancing the security, and ensuring consistent configurations / policies across devices. It improves operational efficiency, increases endpoint security, and simplifies the overall endpoint management process.
Some functions of this EMS are : device inventory and tracking (maintain inventory of all managed endpoints to keep track of important info like device names, hardware specs, softwares installed, and network configurations), configuration and policy management of endpoints, software distribution and patch management of endpoints, security and compliance management (antivirus, firewall settings, encryption policies, etc), remote monitoring and troubleshooting, asset and license management, and more.
16. What is a Legacy System?
A common theme in data centers is that once a service or system is installed, it is difficult to remove that from the data center since it becomes an important part of the data center. These devices / services may sit in data centers for 10+ years. These are referred to as legacy systems. Even though they are old they have an extremely important service running on them that the organization depends on. These legacy systems often run older software or older hardware and it might be difficult to resolve a problem with this device because the software / hardware are not well supported or are difficult to obtain.
Legacy systems are another expression for “really old” but they also may be “really important” because of the dependability of the organization on this. The age of these devices may also create problems when you have problems arise with it.
17. What is an Embedded System?
A device that doesn’t generally have access to the operating system or other aspects inside the device. It is a purpose built device designed for you to only have access to a service or app that this device provides. This could be something like an alarm system, door security system, time card system for clocking in and out for work, a POS system, etc. These don't commonly have operating systems that we can update or even view. This makes us reliable on the manufacturer of these purpose built systems to be able to provide us support and maintenance.

